src/content/docs/common-techniques/deployment.mdx, before:

---
title: "Deployment & CI/CD"
description: "Best practices for deploying Express applications with CI/CD pipelines, environment management, and zero-downtime strategies"
---

import { Aside, Tabs, TabItem, Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

Deploying Express.js applications to production requires careful planning and strategy. This guide covers our recommended deployment approaches, environment management, CI/CD automation, and best practices for reliable production deployments.

## Backend Deployment Options

When deploying Express applications, there are several excellent platforms to consider based on your application's complexity, scale, and budget.

### Cloud Platform Deployment (Render & Railway)

Both [Render](https://render.com/) and [Railway](https://railway.app/) offer excellent options for deploying Express applications with minimal configuration:

<Steps>
1. **Create an account and connect your repository**
   - Sign up at [render.com](https://render.com/) or [railway.app](https://railway.app/)
   - Connect your GitHub repository to the platform
   - Select the branch you want to deploy (usually `main` or `master`)

2. **Configure your service**
   ```bash
   # Build Command
   npm install

   # Start Command
   npm start
   ```

3. **Set environment variables**
   - Add all required environment variables through the platform's UI
   - Include `NODE_ENV=production` and any other necessary variables
   - For Railway, set `PORT=5000` as Railway injects a default port

4. **Database setup (optional)**
   - Both platforms offer managed database services (PostgreSQL, MySQL, MongoDB)
   - Connection strings are automatically injected as environment variables
</Steps>

**Key Benefits:**
- Free tier available for small projects
- Automatic HTTPS with SSL certificates
- Built-in monitoring and logging
- Zero-downtime deployments
- GitHub integration for automatic deployments
- No server management required

**Platform Differences:**
- **Render** has a more generous free tier for web services but limited database free tier
- **Railway** offers a project-based pricing model and excellent database integration
- **Render** provides more configuration options for larger applications
- **Railway** has a simpler interface and faster deployments for small projects

### Azure VPS Deployment

For more control and customization, Azure Virtual Machines provide a robust solution for hosting Express applications.

**Deployment Overview:**

1. **Set up the Azure VM**: Create an Ubuntu Server VM and configure networking to allow HTTP/HTTPS and SSH access.

2. **Configure the server environment**: Install Node.js, PM2 (for process management), and Nginx (as a reverse proxy).

3. **Deploy your application**: Clone your repository, install dependencies, set up environment variables, and start the application with PM2.

4. **Set up Nginx**: Configure Nginx as a reverse proxy to forward requests to your Node.js application.

5. **Enable HTTPS**: Use Let's Encrypt and Certbot to implement SSL for secure connections.

**Key Benefits:**
- Complete control over the server environment
- Scalable infrastructure options
- Customizable security settings
- Suitable for complex deployments
- Integration with Azure services

<Aside type="tip">
  For detailed step-by-step instructions on this approach, refer to this [comprehensive guide on Medium](https://medium.com/@a_zeraibi/step-by-step-guide-to-deploying-your-node-js-app-from-development-to-production-f3af6e16ca07) that covers each aspect of deploying a Node.js application on a VPS.
</Aside>

## Managing Environment Variables

Environment variables are crucial for configuring applications across different environments. Here's how to manage them securely in production:

### Environment Variable Best Practices

1. **Never commit sensitive information to version control**
   ```
   # .gitignore
   .env
   .env.*
   !.env.example
   ```

2. **Provide an example configuration file**
   ```bash
   # .env.example
   NODE_ENV=development
   PORT=3000
   DATABASE_URL=postgres://user:pass@localhost:5432/devdb
   JWT_SECRET=replace-with-secure-secret
   ```

3. **Validate environment variables on startup**
4. **Use different variable sets per environment**
   - Development: `.env.development`
   - Testing: `.env.test`
   - Production: Set through deployment platform UI

<Aside type="caution">
  Never log or expose environment variables in your application. Be especially careful with error messages that might reveal sensitive configuration details.
</Aside>

## CI/CD with GitHub Actions

Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment (CI/CD) automates testing and deployment. GitHub Actions is our preferred solution for its simplicity and GitHub integration.

### Basic CI/CD Workflow

```yaml
# .github/workflows/deploy.yml
name: Deploy Express App

on:
  push:
    branches: [ main ]
  pull_request:
    branches: [ main ]

jobs:
  test:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    
    steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v3
    
    - name: Use Node.js
      uses: actions/setup-node@v3
      with:
        node-version: '18'
        cache: 'npm'
        
    - name: Install dependencies
      run: npm ci
      
    - name: Run linting
      run: npm run lint
      
    - name: Run tests
      run: npm test
      env:
        NODE_ENV: test
        DATABASE_URL: ${{ secrets.TEST_DATABASE_URL }}
        JWT_SECRET: ${{ secrets.JWT_SECRET }}

  deploy:
    needs: test
    if: github.ref == 'refs/heads/main'
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    
    steps:
    - name: Deploy to Render
      uses: johnbeynon/render-deploy-action@v0.0.8
      with:
        service-id: ${{ secrets.RENDER_SERVICE_ID }}
        api-key: ${{ secrets.RENDER_API_KEY }}
```

### GitHub Actions Best Practices

1. **Run tests before deployment**: Always run tests before deploying to catch issues early

2. **Use environment secrets**: Store sensitive values as GitHub Secrets, scoped to environments

3. **Create different workflows for different needs**:
   - CI workflow for pull requests
   - CD workflow for deployment to environments
   - Scheduled workflows for maintenance tasks

4. **Cache dependencies**: Speed up workflows by caching node_modules

5. **Implement approval gates**: Use environment protection rules to require approvals for production deployments

<Aside type="tip">
  GitHub Actions provides environment-specific secrets and required reviewers for deployments. Use these features to ensure that production deployments require explicit approval from senior team members.
</Aside>

## Deployment Best Practices

### Zero-Downtime Deployments

Zero-downtime deployments ensure users experience no interruption during updates.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem label="PM2 Cluster Mode">
  ```javascript
  // ecosystem.config.js
  module.exports = {
    apps: [{
      name: 'express-app',
      script: 'src/server.js',
      instances: 'max', // Use available CPU cores
      exec_mode: 'cluster',
      autorestart: true,
      watch: false,
      max_memory_restart: '1G',
      env_production: {
        NODE_ENV: 'production',
        PORT: 3000
      }
    }]
  };
  ```
  
  **Deployment script:**
  ```bash
  # deploy.sh
  git pull origin main
  npm ci --production
  pm2 reload ecosystem.config.js --env production
  ```
  
  PM2 will gracefully reload workers one by one, ensuring no downtime.
  </TabItem>
  
  <TabItem label="Health Checks">
  ```javascript
  // src/routes/health.routes.js
  const express = require('express');
  const router = express.Router();

  router.get('/health', async (req, res) => {
    try {
      // Basic health check
      res.status(200).json({ status: 'UP' });
      
      // Advanced health check
      /*
      const checks = await Promise.all([
        checkDatabase(),
        checkRedisConnection(),
        checkExternalAPIs()
      ]);
      
      const allOk = checks.every(c => c.status === 'UP');
      
      res.status(allOk ? 200 : 503).json({
        status: allOk ? 'UP' : 'DOWN',
        checks
      });
      */
    } catch (error) {
      res.status(503).json({ status: 'DOWN', error: error.message });
    }
  });

  module.exports = router;
  ```
  
  Implement a health check endpoint for load balancers and monitoring to determine when your service is ready to accept traffic.
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Conclusion

Deploying Express applications to production requires attention to many details across infrastructure, security, monitoring, and automation. By following the practices outlined in this guide, you'll create a robust deployment pipeline that delivers consistent, reliable updates to your users.

**Key takeaways:**

1. **Choose the right platform** for your needs (Render, Railway, or Azure VPS)
2. **Secure your environment variables** and never commit secrets to code
3. **Implement CI/CD with GitHub Actions** to automate testing and deployment
4. **Use zero-downtime deployment techniques** to avoid service interruptions
5. **Monitor your production application** to catch issues quickly

By implementing these practices, you'll create a professional deployment process that supports the ongoing evolution of your Express application.

## Further Reading

- [How to Self-Host a Node.js app on your VPS](https://youtu.be/2T_Dx7YgBFw)

Commit message:

chore: remove obsolete VSCode configuration files and update documentation for GCP deployment

src/content/docs/common-techniques/deployment.mdx, after:

---
title: "Deployment & CI/CD"
description: "Best practices for deploying Express applications with CI/CD pipelines, environment management, and zero-downtime strategies"
---

import { Aside, Tabs, TabItem, Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

Deploying Express.js applications to production requires careful planning and strategy. This guide covers our recommended deployment approaches, environment management, CI/CD automation, and best practices for reliable production deployments.

## Backend Deployment Options

When deploying Express applications, there are several excellent platforms to consider based on your application's complexity, scale, and budget.

### Cloud Platform Deployment (Render & Railway)

Both [Render](https://render.com/) and [Railway](https://railway.app/) offer excellent options for deploying Express applications with minimal configuration:

<Steps>
1. **Create an account and connect your repository**
   - Sign up at [render.com](https://render.com/) or [railway.app](https://railway.app/)
   - Connect your GitHub repository to the platform
   - Select the branch you want to deploy (usually `main` or `master`)

2. **Configure your service**
   ```bash
   # Build Command
   npm install

   # Start Command
   npm start
   ```

3. **Set environment variables**
   - Add all required environment variables through the platform's UI
   - Include `NODE_ENV=production` and any other necessary variables
   - For Railway, set `PORT=5000` as Railway injects a default port

4. **Database setup (optional)**
   - Both platforms offer managed database services (PostgreSQL, MySQL, MongoDB)
   - Connection strings are automatically injected as environment variables
</Steps>

**Key Benefits:**
- Free tier available for small projects
- Automatic HTTPS with SSL certificates
- Built-in monitoring and logging
- Zero-downtime deployments
- GitHub integration for automatic deployments
- No server management required

**Platform Differences:**
- **Render** has a more generous free tier for web services but limited database free tier
- **Railway** offers a project-based pricing model and excellent database integration
- **Render** provides more configuration options for larger applications
- **Railway** has a simpler interface and faster deployments for small projects

### Azure VPS Deployment

For more control and customization, Azure Virtual Machines provide a robust solution for hosting Express applications.

**Deployment Overview:**

1. **Set up the Azure VM**: Create an Ubuntu Server VM and configure networking to allow HTTP/HTTPS and SSH access.

2. **Configure the server environment**: Install Node.js, PM2 (for process management), and Nginx (as a reverse proxy).

3. **Deploy your application**: Clone your repository, install dependencies, set up environment variables, and start the application with PM2.

4. **Set up Nginx**: Configure Nginx as a reverse proxy to forward requests to your Node.js application.

5. **Enable HTTPS**: Use Let's Encrypt and Certbot to implement SSL for secure connections.

**Key Benefits:**
- Complete control over the server environment
- Scalable infrastructure options
- Customizable security settings
- Suitable for complex deployments
- Integration with Azure services

<Aside type="tip">
  For detailed step-by-step instructions on this approach, refer to this [comprehensive guide on Medium](https://medium.com/@a_zeraibi/step-by-step-guide-to-deploying-your-node-js-app-from-development-to-production-f3af6e16ca07) that covers each aspect of deploying a Node.js application on a VPS.
</Aside>

### Google Cloud Platform (GCP) Deployment

Google Cloud Platform offers a comprehensive suite of services for deploying Express applications, ranging from simple serverless solutions to enterprise-grade container orchestration.

**Deployment Overview:**

1. **Choose your deployment strategy**: Select between App Engine for serverless deployment, Cloud Run for containerized applications, or Compute Engine for full VM control.

2. **Configure your application**: Set up your Express app with the appropriate runtime configuration, environment variables, and scaling parameters.

3. **Integrate with GCP services**: Connect to managed databases (Cloud SQL), implement authentication (Firebase Auth), and set up monitoring (Cloud Operations).

4. **Deploy and monitor**: Use the Google Cloud CLI or Console to deploy your application and monitor its performance with built-in observability tools.

**Key Benefits:**
- **Serverless options**: App Engine provides zero-configuration scaling and automatic infrastructure management
- **Enterprise security**: Identity and Access Management (IAM) with fine-grained permissions and secure service-to-service communication
- **Global infrastructure**: Deploy across multiple regions with automatic load balancing and CDN integration
- **Integrated ecosystem**: Seamless integration with Firebase, BigQuery, and other Google services
- **Cost optimization**: Pay-per-use pricing with automatic scaling based on demand
- **Advanced monitoring**: Built-in logging, metrics, and alerting through Cloud Operations suite

<Aside type="tip">
  GCP's strength lies in its integrated ecosystem. Consider how Firebase Authentication, Cloud Storage, and BigQuery might complement your Express application for a full-stack solution that scales with your business needs.
</Aside>

## Managing Environment Variables

Environment variables are crucial for configuring applications across different environments. Here's how to manage them securely in production:

### Environment Variable Best Practices

1. **Never commit sensitive information to version control**
   ```
   # .gitignore
   .env
   .env.*
   !.env.example
   ```

2. **Provide an example configuration file**
   ```bash
   # .env.example
   NODE_ENV=development
   PORT=3000
   DATABASE_URL=postgres://user:pass@localhost:5432/devdb
   JWT_SECRET=replace-with-secure-secret
   ```

3. **Validate environment variables on startup**
4. **Use different variable sets per environment**
   - Development: `.env.development`
   - Testing: `.env.test`
   - Production: Set through deployment platform UI

<Aside type="caution">
  Never log or expose environment variables in your application. Be especially careful with error messages that might reveal sensitive configuration details.
</Aside>

## CI/CD with GitHub Actions

Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment (CI/CD) automates testing and deployment. GitHub Actions is our preferred solution for its simplicity and GitHub integration.

### Basic CI/CD Workflow

```yaml
# .github/workflows/deploy.yml
name: Deploy Express App

on:
  push:
    branches: [ main ]
  pull_request:
    branches: [ main ]

jobs:
  test:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    
    steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v3
    
    - name: Use Node.js
      uses: actions/setup-node@v3
      with:
        node-version: '18'
        cache: 'npm'
        
    - name: Install dependencies
      run: npm ci
      
    - name: Run linting
      run: npm run lint
      
    - name: Run tests
      run: npm test
      env:
        NODE_ENV: test
        DATABASE_URL: ${{ secrets.TEST_DATABASE_URL }}
        JWT_SECRET: ${{ secrets.JWT_SECRET }}

  deploy:
    needs: test
    if: github.ref == 'refs/heads/main'
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    
    steps:
    - name: Deploy to Render
      uses: johnbeynon/render-deploy-action@v0.0.8
      with:
        service-id: ${{ secrets.RENDER_SERVICE_ID }}
        api-key: ${{ secrets.RENDER_API_KEY }}
```

### GitHub Actions Best Practices

1. **Run tests before deployment**: Always run tests before deploying to catch issues early

2. **Use environment secrets**: Store sensitive values as GitHub Secrets, scoped to environments

3. **Create different workflows for different needs**:
   - CI workflow for pull requests
   - CD workflow for deployment to environments
   - Scheduled workflows for maintenance tasks

4. **Cache dependencies**: Speed up workflows by caching node_modules

5. **Implement approval gates**: Use environment protection rules to require approvals for production deployments

<Aside type="tip">
  GitHub Actions provides environment-specific secrets and required reviewers for deployments. Use these features to ensure that production deployments require explicit approval from senior team members.
</Aside>

## Deployment Best Practices

### Zero-Downtime Deployments

Zero-downtime deployments ensure users experience no interruption during updates.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem label="PM2 Cluster Mode">
  ```javascript
  // ecosystem.config.js
  module.exports = {
    apps: [{
      name: 'express-app',
      script: 'src/server.js',
      instances: 'max', // Use available CPU cores
      exec_mode: 'cluster',
      autorestart: true,
      watch: false,
      max_memory_restart: '1G',
      env_production: {
        NODE_ENV: 'production',
        PORT: 3000
      }
    }]
  };
  ```
  
  **Deployment script:**
  ```bash
  # deploy.sh
  git pull origin main
  npm ci --production
  pm2 reload ecosystem.config.js --env production
  ```
  
  PM2 will gracefully reload workers one by one, ensuring no downtime.
  </TabItem>
  
  <TabItem label="Health Checks">
  ```javascript
  // src/routes/health.routes.js
  const express = require('express');
  const router = express.Router();

  router.get('/health', async (req, res) => {
    try {
      // Basic health check
      res.status(200).json({ status: 'UP' });
      
      // Advanced health check
      /*
      const checks = await Promise.all([
        checkDatabase(),
        checkRedisConnection(),
        checkExternalAPIs()
      ]);
      
      const allOk = checks.every(c => c.status === 'UP');
      
      res.status(allOk ? 200 : 503).json({
        status: allOk ? 'UP' : 'DOWN',
        checks
      });
      */
    } catch (error) {
      res.status(503).json({ status: 'DOWN', error: error.message });
    }
  });

  module.exports = router;
  ```
  
  Implement a health check endpoint for load balancers and monitoring to determine when your service is ready to accept traffic.
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Conclusion

Deploying Express applications to production requires attention to many details across infrastructure, security, monitoring, and automation. By following the practices outlined in this guide, you'll create a robust deployment pipeline that delivers consistent, reliable updates to your users.

**Key takeaways:**

1. **Choose the right platform** for your needs (Render, Railway, or Azure VPS)
2. **Secure your environment variables** and never commit secrets to code
3. **Implement CI/CD with GitHub Actions** to automate testing and deployment
4. **Use zero-downtime deployment techniques** to avoid service interruptions
5. **Monitor your production application** to catch issues quickly

By implementing these practices, you'll create a professional deployment process that supports the ongoing evolution of your Express application.

## Further Reading

- [How to Self-Host a Node.js app on your VPS](https://youtu.be/2T_Dx7YgBFw)
